Monolayer: Complex hierarchies, patterns, tiling and writing to files
---------------------------------------------------------------------

**Note**: mBuild expects all distance units to be in nanometers.

In this example, we’ll cover assembling more complex hierarchies of
components using patterns, tiling and how to output systems to files. To
illustrate these concepts, let’s build an alkane monolayer on a
crystalline substrate.

First, let’s build our monomers and functionalized them with a silane
group which we can then attach to the substrate. The ``Alkane`` example
uses the ``polymer`` tool to combine ``CH2`` and ``CH3`` repeat units.
You also have the option to cap the front and back of the chain or to
leave a ``CH2`` group with a dangling port. The ``Silane`` compound is a
Si(OH)2 group with two ports facing out from the central Si. Lastly, we
combine ``alkane`` with ``silane`` and add a label to ``AlkylSilane``
which points to, ``silane['down']``. This allows us to reference it
later using ``AlkylSilane['down']`` rather than
``AlkylSilane['silane']['down']``.

**Note:** In ``Compounds`` with multiple ``Ports``, by convention, we
try to label every ``Port`` successively as ‘up’, ‘down’, ‘left’,
‘right’, ‘front’, ‘back’ which should roughly correspond to their
relative orientations. This is a bit tricky to enforce because the
system is so flexible so use your best judgement and try to be
consistent! The more components we collect in our library with the same
labeling conventions, the easier it becomes to build ever more complex
structures.

.. code:: ipython3

    import mbuild as mb
    
    from mbuild.lib.recipes import Alkane
    from mbuild.lib.moieties import Silane
    
    
    class AlkylSilane(mb.Compound):
        """A silane functionalized alkane chain with one Port. """
        def __init__(self, chain_length):
            super(AlkylSilane, self).__init__()
    
            alkane = Alkane(chain_length, cap_end=False)
            self.add(alkane, 'alkane')
            silane = Silane()
            self.add(silane, 'silane')
            mb.force_overlap(self['alkane'], self['alkane']['down'], self['silane']['up'])
    
            # Hoist silane port to AlkylSilane level.
            self.add(silane['down'], 'down', containment=False)

.. code:: ipython3

    AlkylSilane(5).visualize()

Now let’s create a substrate to which we can later attach our monomers:

.. code:: ipython3

    import mbuild as mb
    from mbuild.lib.surfaces import Betacristobalite
    
    surface = Betacristobalite()
    tiled_surface = mb.lib.recipes.TiledCompound(surface, n_tiles=(2, 1, 1))

Here we’ve imported a beta-cristobalite surface from our component
library. The ``TiledCompound`` tool allows you replicate any
``Compound`` in the x-, y- and z-directions by any number of times - 2,
1 and 1 for our case.

Next, let’s create our monomer and a hydrogen atom that we’ll place on
unoccupied surface sites:

.. code:: ipython3

    from mbuild.lib.atoms import H
    alkylsilane = AlkylSilane(chain_length=10)
    hydrogen = H()

Then we need to tell mBuild how to arrange the chains on the surface.
This is accomplished with the “pattern” tools. Every pattern is just a
collection of points. There are all kinds of patterns like spherical,
2D, regular, irregular etc. When you use the ``apply_pattern`` command,
you effectively superimpose the pattern onto the host compound, mBuild
figures out what the closest ports are to the pattern points and then
attaches copies of the guest onto the binding sites identified by the
pattern:

.. code:: ipython3

    pattern = mb.Grid2DPattern(8, 8)  # Evenly spaced, 2D grid of points.
    
    # Attach chains to specified binding sites. Other sites get a hydrogen.
    chains, hydrogens = pattern.apply_to_compound(host=tiled_surface, guest=alkylsilane, backfill=hydrogen)

Also note the ``backfill`` optional argument which allows you to place a
different compound on any unused ports. In this case we want to backfill
with hydrogen atoms on every port without a chain.

.. code:: ipython3

    monolayer = mb.Compound([tiled_surface, chains, hydrogens])
    monolayer.visualize() # Warning: may be slow in IPython notebooks

.. code:: ipython3

    # Save as .mol2 file
    monolayer.save('monolayer.mol2', overwrite=True)

``lib.recipes.monolayer.py`` wraps many these functions into a simple,
general class for generating the monolayers, as shown below:

.. code:: ipython3

    from mbuild.lib.recipes import Monolayer
    
    monolayer = Monolayer(fractions=[1.0], chains=alkylsilane, backfill=hydrogen, 
                          pattern=mb.Grid2DPattern(n=8, m=8), 
                          surface=surface, tile_x=2, tile_y=1)
    monolayer.visualize()


